Slug: 2012-08-03-unilangs
Date: 2012-08-03
Title: "Universal" Language Codes
Author: Steve Losh
Tags: python, i18n
Category: tech notes

At [Amara][] we deal with languages a lot.  We support transcription and
translation into hundreds of languages.  One problem we've run into is the
concept of "language codes".  In this post I'll talk about the problem and how
we've dealt with it.

[Amara]: http://amara.org/

[TOC]

Language Code "Standards"
=========================

When representing a particular language programatically, you'll usually use some
kind of shortened representation, such as `"en"` for English.  Which codes you
use depend on which standard you've chosen to follow.

[This XKCD comic](https://xkcd.com/927/) sums up the problem pretty well.  There
are numerous language code standards out there.  A few examples:

* [ISO 639-1][]
* [ISO 639-2][]
* [ISO 639-3][]
* Django's custom scheme
* Youtube's custom scheme
* Our own custom scheme

[ISO 639-1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1
[ISO 639-2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-2
[ISO 639-3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-3

There are others as well.  We need to be able to translate to and from these
codes.  For example, when we send subtitles to Youtube we need to use the
language code Youtube expects.

Unilangs
========

To solve this problem we've created an internal library we call Unilangs.  It's
designed to work similarly to Python's Unicode and String types, in that you
"decode" a raw language code into a "unilang" and then "encode" it back to
a language code when you need it.

When encoding and decoding you need to know the language code scheme, just like
you need to know the encoding (ASCII, UTF-8, etc) when working with Unicode and
String objects.

For example:

    :::pycon
    >>> lang = unilangs.LanguageCode('fy', 'iso-639-1')
    >>> lang.name()
    u'Frisian'

    >>> lang.encode('django')
    'fy-nl'
    >>> lang.encode('youtube')
    'fy'
    >>> lang.encode('iso-639-1')
    'fy'

Here we take an ISO 639-1 language code for [Frisian][] and decode it into
a Unilangs `LanguageCode` object.  Then we encode it into three different
schemas, much like you could encode a Unicode object into different bytestrings.

[Frisian]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frisian_languages

It's also extensible.  You can add new language code schemas on the fly with the
`add_standard` function, and even use existing schemas as a base:it

    :::pycon
    >>> add_standard('my-standard', {'american': 'en'}, base='iso-639-1')
 
This creates a new custom standard, which is pretty much like ISO-639-1 but adds
a code called 'american' that represents the English language.

So far Unilangs has been working well for us.  There are still a few rough edges
that we haven't had time to polish off, but overall it's saved our sanity when
dealing with many different language code "standards".

Lessons
=======

Unilangs is a small library, but I did learn a few things while building it.
Here they are, in no particular order.

Use Familiar Interfaces
-----------------------

When creating a library or API you can ease the learning curve by using concepts
the user is already familiar with.

In this case I used the Unicode/String interface as a model, which makes working
with Unilangs feel familiar even if it's your first time (assuming you
understand Unicode and String in Python, of course).

Document as You Go
------------------

Write your documentation as you create the library.

There's a tendency to say "Oh, I'll document that later" and then forget about
it forever.  It's hard to document something you wrote six months ago, but much
easier and more effective to talk about it when it's fresh in your mind.

Documenting as you go also forces you to think about how your library will be
actually be *used*.  It can reveal problems early in the process that would
result in throwing away a lot of code if you continued down a dead-end road.

Yes, this means that sometimes you'll be throwing away documentation.  That's
not a big deal.  Better to throw away a few minutes worth of typing than create
a library that's painful to use.  If this really bothers you a great deal, you
probably need to [learn to type faster][type].

[type]: http://steve-yegge.blogspot.com/2008/09/programmings-dirtiest-little-secret.html

Basic Data Structures Can Get You Far
-------------------------------------

If you're working in a dynamically typed language, you can often do quite a lot
with language builtins like maps, sets, lists, and such.  Don't make excessive
numbers of classes if you don't need to.

Unilangs defines one new class: `LanguageCode`.  All the internal workings are
stored as vanilla python dictionaries.  Standards are added by passing
dictionaries of strings.  Encoded language codes are returned as strings.

Everyone already knows how to work with these datatypes, so don't introduce new
ones if the default types can handle it.

This wouldn't apply to languages like Haskell or ML, where the type system is
much richer and more helpful.

Status
======

Currently Unilangs is still tied into our codebase.  It's very self-contained so
it wouldn't be hard to turn it into a standalone library.

Our codebase is AGPL'ed.  We're planning on releasing Unilangs under a more
permissive license when we find some extra time.  If it sounds like something
that would be useful to you and you want us to hurry up and release it, let us
know!
